docs: add semaphore spec (#10)
zkspecs/zkspecs: specs/3/README.md

# Semaphore Specification

---

title: Semaphore
name: Semaphore Protocol

> status: draft

Reviewer: Is this supposed to be kept in "draft" when merged in main?

category: Standards Track
tags: zero-knowledge, identity, privacy, anonymity, proof of membership, groups
editor: Vivian Plasencia <vivianpc@pse.dev>
contributors: Andy <andy@pse.dev>, Cedoor <cedoor@pse.dev>, Oskar Thoren <oskarth@titanproxy.com>

---

## Change Process

This document is governed by the [1/COSS](https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/tree/main/specs/1) (COSS).

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Abstract

Semaphore is a [zero-knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof) (zk) protocol that allows users to prove their membership in a group and send messages such as votes or feedback without revealing their identity.

> It also provides a simple mechanism to prevent double-signaling, which means that the same proof cannot be verified twice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also provides a simple mechanism to prevent double-signalling, which means that the same proof cannot be verified twice.
```

Author: `double-signaling` is also correct (American English), it's what we have been using in Semaphore so far, so maybe it's better to maintain it. 

https://docs.semaphore.pse.dev/#overview

## Motivation

> Privacy remains a significant challenge, with existing solutions often being limited, hard to extend, and overly complex. These limitations make it difficult to create privacy-preserving applications and prevent users from securely interacting without exposing their identities. Semaphore addresses these issues by enabling anonymous [signaling](#Signals), solving the critical need for privacy while maintaining transparency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Privacy remains a significant challenge, with existing solutions often being limited, hard to extend, and overly complex. These limitations make it difficult to create privacy-preserving applications and prevent users from securely interacting without exposing their identities. Semaphore addresses these issues by enabling anonymous [signalling](#Signals), solving the critical need for privacy while maintaining transparency.
```

Author: I just answered this here: https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/pull/10#discussion_r1941329272

## System Components

Implementations MUST provide:

### 1. Identity

An identity serves as a unique identifier for users.

### 2. Group

A group is a collection of identities represented in a structured format.

### 3. Anonymous Proof of Membership

An anonymous proof of membership enables users to prove their inclusion in a group without revealing their identity.

### 4. Nullifier

A value designed to be a unique identifier for the zk proof. It is generated using the identity.

### 5. Anonymous Message

After joining a group and proving that they are part of it, users can also send an anonymous message.

## Interaction of System Components

Semaphore Flow:

1. The user generates an identity.
2. The identity is added to the group.
3. An anonymous membership proof can be generated using the identity and group.
4. A nullifier is generated to uniquely represent the user's zk proof while ensuring anonymity.
5. The user can attach an anonymous message (such as a vote, text message).

<div style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="./images/system-components.svg" alt="Description of SVG" width="500" height="500">
</div>

## Implementation

> The implementation section will refer to Semaphore v4 implemented by [PSE](https://pse.dev/).

Reviewer: Link to commit maybe?

Author: I just added the link to the Semaphore v4 release on GitHub.

Semaphore is implemented using [Circom](https://github.com/iden3/circom) + [Snarkjs](https://github.com/iden3/snarkjs) + [Groth16](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf).

> - **Circom**: Used to write the circuit.

Reviewer: Maybe add some precision on what is meant by circuit? i.e. R1CS? plonkish?

Author: I just updated it with this:

```md
- **Circom**: Used to write the circuit and generate its [R1CS constraint system](https://docs.circom.io/background/background/#_1).
```

> - **Snarkjs**: Used to generate zk-artifacts and generate and verify the zero-knowledge proofs.

Reviewer: Maybe add some additional infos about what are "zk-artifacts"?

Author: I just added the `zk-artifacts` definition to the Glossary.

> - **Snarkjs**: Used to generate zk-artifacts and generate and verify the zero-knowledge proofs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Snarkjs**: Generates artifacts, proving and verification logic for zero-knowledge proofs.
```

Author: I just updated this with the following:

```md
- **SnarkJS**: Used to generate [zk-artifacts](#zk-artifacts) as well as to create and verify zero-knowledge proofs.
```

Reviewer: Ok I'm going to be annoying on this one, I add that those proofs are zkSNARKs, not only zk!
`- **SnarkJS**: Used to generate [zk-artifacts](#zk-artifacts) as well as to create and verify zero-knowledge snark proofs.`

Author: Thank you very much! Updated ✅

```md
- **Snarkjs**: Used to generate [zk-artifacts](#zk-artifacts) as well as to create and verify zk-SNARK proofs.
```

- **Groth16**: Used as a proving system.

### Semaphore Identity

> The identity of a user in the Semaphore protocol. A Semaphore identity consists of an [EdDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdDSA) public/private key pair and a commitment. Semaphore uses an [EdDSA implementation](https://github.com/privacy-scaling-explorations/zk-kit/tree/main/packages/eddsa-poseidon) based on [Baby Jubjub](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2494) and [Poseidon](https://www.poseidon-hash.info/).

Reviewer: Maybe add a few things on the parameters used for the poseidon hash?

Author: What do you mean exactly?

I added some info about how is Poseidon used when talking about the circuit.

Reviewer: For instance, I would at least mention the field over which Poseidon is instantiated?

Reviewer: Yes, that should be a good start!
Also, if I'm correct, semaphore uses the $\text{POSEIDON}^{\pi} - 128$ instantiation, described in table 2 (p. 8) [in the paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.pdf), since it uses the [poseidon circom implementation](https://github.com/iden3/circomlib/blob/master/circuits/poseidon.circom). 
It might be worth mentioning this, since users/implementers can then easily retrieve round parameters.

#### Outputs

- `merkleRoot`: Merkle Root of the LeanIMT.
- `nullifier`: A value designed to be a unique identifier for the zk proof. It is used to prevent the same zk proof from being used twice. In Semaphore, the nullifier is the hash of the scope and secret value of the user's Semaphore identity.

The hash function used in the circuit is Poseidon because it is a zk-friendly hash function.

### Proof Generation

Snarkjs is used to generate the proof.

```ts
const { proof, publicSignals } = await groth16.fullProve(
  {
    secret: identity.secretScalar,
    merkleProofLength,
    merkleProofIndices,
    merkleProofSiblings,
    scope: hash(scope),
    message: hash(message)
  },
  wasm,
  zkey
)

return {
  merkleTreeDepth,
  merkleTreeRoot: merkleProof.root.toString(),
  nullifier: publicSignals[1],
  message: message.toString() as NumericString,
  scope: scope.toString() as NumericString,
  points: packGroth16Proof(proof)
}
```

To know more about the proof generation see [the code](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/blob/main/packages/proof/src/generate-proof.ts).

> #### Example of Semaphore Proof

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Semaphore Proof Example
```

    '5484905467799538881631237123282286864306155680753671338313686933143657835972',
    '16129789229127169079253218689550197285028424883172925653046098078118792423164',
    '20777706122379854993524659601832014684665489694335277047215897593373874956681',
    '6697558559751679943942291885282718275907555268106795371542167431979105110434',
    '19709269142703129641057076037387702381970592578248722843989118216760760132874',
    '17493422037248079872314969622558990504818232868144223100447800353776555945950',
    '20398320346518400096197920333973312490517624241764728676355205902471625807914'
  ]
}
```

### Proof Verification

Proof verification works off-chain and on-chain (on [EVM-compatible chains](#EVM-Compatible-Chains)).

#### Off-chain

Snarkjs is used to verify the proof.

```ts
return groth16.verify(
  verificationKey,
  [merkleTreeRoot, nullifier, hash(message), hash(scope)],
  unpackGroth16Proof(points)
)
```

To know more about the proof verification in TypeScript/JavaScript see [the code](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/blob/main/packages/proof/src/verify-proof.ts).

#### On-chain

> Snarkjs is used to generate a Solidity verifier per tree depth. Then all the verifiers are mixed into only one. To know more about the verifier see the [Semaphore Verifier](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/blob/main/packages/contracts/contracts/base/SemaphoreVerifier.sol).

Reviewer: I'm not sure to exactly understand what this is doing. What do we mean by "mixed into only one"?

Author: There is one Solidity verifier per tree depth, since Semaphore supports many tree depths, all of them were combined into a single verifier. 

I just updated this section to improve clarity:

```md
Snarkjs is used to generate a Solidity verifier per tree depth. Then, all verifiers are merged into a single one.
```

```solidity
return
    verifier.verifyProof(
        [proof.points[0], proof.points[1]],
        [[proof.points[2], proof.points[3]], [proof.points[4], proof.points[5]]],
        [proof.points[6], proof.points[7]],
        [proof.merkleTreeRoot, proof.nullifier, _hash(proof.message), _hash(proof.scope)],
        proof.merkleTreeDepth
    );
```

### Implementation Notes

- Identity generation SHOULD be performed off-chain, in the user's device.

> - Semaphore proof generation SHOULD be performed off-chain, in the user's device.

Reviewer: Isn't this contradictory wrt the limitations you mention below? Maybe it could be worth it to qualify in which conditions the semaphore proof generation should be performed on the user's device?

Author: Why it is a contradiction? People can generate proofs but when there are many users (millions) some devices won't be able to generate the merkle proof. That's why I used `SHOULD` instead of `MUST`. `SHOULD` here means that by default the proof generation will be done offf-chain unless there is a better way to do it. Here you can find the difference: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119

Reviewer: @vplasencia  Correct, using `SHOULD` is the way to go! I'm rather pointing out that it could be worth it to describe the conditions in which generating proofs on the user's device make sense. This is because, as Oskar mentions, this directly affects the security model.

- **On-chain costs**: As the tree grows on-chain, the gas cost of insertions also increases.
- **zk artifacts**: People need to download zk artifacts to generate the zk proof and these have a couple of megabytes which can be an issue with very slow internet connection.

## Privacy Guarantees

The protocol MUST guarantee:

- Private Identity values remain private and controlled by their owners.
- The identity cannot be linked to the message.
- The identity cannot be revealed while generating the zk proof.

## References

1. [Semaphore Whitepaper](https://semaphore.pse.dev/whitepaper-v1.pdf)
2. [Semaphore GitHub organization](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol)
3. [Semaphore repository](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore)

## Glossary

### Signals

The term "signals" in Semaphore refers to the values the user shares when voting, confirming, sending a message, etc.

### Signaling

The act of sharing the signal (e.g. a message or vote).

> ### EVM-Compatible Chains

Reviewer: Can't semaphore just work on chains where you can deploy a groth16 verifier? Maybe it could be worth mentioning this?

Author: Yes, correct. Makes sense to add this info.

```md
Proof verification works both off-chain and on-chain (on [EVM-compatible chains](#evm-compatible-chains) where the Groth16 Semaphore verifier can be deployed).
``` 

I just added a commit with the info: https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/pull/10/commits/107c67ef31ca4362fcd6f68ca8636b9cf8cd44b5

## Abstract

Semaphore is a [zero-knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof) (zk) protocol that allows users to prove their membership in a group and send messages such as votes or feedback without revealing their identity.

It also provides a simple mechanism to prevent double-signaling, which means that the same proof cannot be verified twice.

## Motivation

Privacy remains a significant challenge, with existing solutions often being limited, hard to extend, and overly complex. These limitations make it difficult to create privacy-preserving applications and prevent users from securely interacting without exposing their identities. Semaphore addresses these issues by enabling anonymous [signaling](#Signals), solving the critical need for privacy while maintaining transparency.

## System Components

Implementations MUST provide:

### 1. Identity

An identity serves as a unique identifier for users.

### 2. Group

A group is a collection of identities represented in a structured format.

### 3. Anonymous Proof of Membership

An anonymous proof of membership enables users to prove their inclusion in a group without revealing their identity.

### 4. Nullifier

> A value designed to be a unique identifier for the zk proof. It is generated using the identity.

Reviewer 2: Is the nullifier tight to the proof or the identity?

Author: To the zk proof but it is generated using the secret value of the identity. The same identity can generate many nullifiers if there are many different scopes. The nullifier is the hash of the scope and the secret value of the identity: https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/blob/main/packages/circuits/src/semaphore.circom#L68

- `merkleProofIndices`: Merkle Proof Indices used to calculate the Merkle Root.
- `secret`: The secret is the scalar generated from the EdDSA private key. Using the secret scalar instead of the private key allows this circuit to skip steps 1, 2, 3 in the generation of the public key defined in [RFC 8032](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8032#section-5.1.5), making the circuit more efficient and simple. See the [Semaphore identity package](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/tree/main/packages/identity) to know more about how the identity is generated.

#### Public Inputs

- `message`: The value the user shares when voting, confirming, sending a text message, etc.
- `scope`: A value used like a topic on which users can generate a valid proof only once. The scope is supposed to be used to generate the nullifier.

#### Outputs

- `merkleRoot`: Merkle Root of the LeanIMT.
- `nullifier`: A value designed to be a unique identifier for the zk proof. It is used to prevent the same zk proof from being used twice. In Semaphore, the nullifier is the hash of the scope and secret value of the user's Semaphore identity.

> The hash function used in the circuit is Poseidon because it is a zk-friendly hash function.

Reviewer 2: It would be great to specify that it would work with any other hash function, and Poseidon is not a `MUST`

Author: The way I wrote the document is that everything is not a MUST or SHOULD, etc. unless I write that it's a MUST or SHOULD, etc. That's why I didn't say that EdDSA is a MUST (because devs can use other ways to generate identities) or Poseidon (devs can use other hash functions) or a Merkle Tree (devs can use other ways to represent a group).

Then in the implementation, I just explained the main ideas so that it's easier for devs to implement it.

Does it make sense?

# Semaphore Specification

---

title: Semaphore
name: Semaphore Protocol
status: draft
category: Standards Track
tags: zero-knowledge, identity, privacy, anonymity, proof of membership, groups
editor: Vivian Plasencia <vivianpc@pse.dev>
contributors: Andy <andy@pse.dev>, Cedoor <cedoor@pse.dev>, Oskar Thoren <oskarth@titanproxy.com>

> ---

Author: I just updated it. See commit: https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/pull/10/commits/43cf08a70617f7631e8b55143316db3705567dbf

Please let me know if anything else needs to be updated.

> ---

Reviewer 3: If you see linked spec it says:

```
---
slug: 1
title: 1/COSS
```

Semaphore spec says:

```
# Semaphore Specification

---
```e
I believe YAML frontmatter has to be first, before any title, otherwise it won't be rendered properly

> ---

Author: Thanks. I see. I just updated it. I was following the Anon-Aadhaar doc, this should be updated there too. 

See commit: https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/pull/10/commits/b5830577ca1e0893ab710a0902c362f4adb6a2cc

## Change Process

This document is governed by the [1/COSS](https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/tree/main/specs/1) (COSS).

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Abstract

Semaphore is a [zero-knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof) (zk) protocol that allows users to prove their membership in a group and send messages such as votes or feedback without revealing their identity.

It also provides a simple mechanism to prevent [double-signaling](#signaling), which means that the same proof cannot be verified twice.

## Motivation

> Privacy remains a significant challenge, with existing solutions often being limited, hard to extend, and overly complex. These limitations make it difficult to create privacy-preserving applications and prevent users from securely interacting without exposing their identities. Semaphore addresses these issues by enabling the sharing of anonymous [messages](#message), solving the critical need for privacy while maintaining transparency.

Author: I just updated the motivation to a little more precise.

Added: `Privacy remains a significant challenge in the digital world`.

See commit: https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/pull/10/commits/db30b0e72aa9a40311ee5c809e68bb2000a256a4

> Privacy remains a significant challenge, with existing solutions often being limited, hard to extend, and overly complex. These limitations make it difficult to create privacy-preserving applications and prevent users from securely interacting without exposing their identities. Semaphore addresses these issues by enabling the sharing of anonymous [messages](#message), solving the critical need for privacy while maintaining transparency.

Reviewer 3: Hm, that's generic? I still don't know what you mean by privacy. What exact information is being kept private? Compared to what? It doesn't touch on group membership or anything. Compare this paragraph to the one I linked above in comment https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/tree/main/specs/2#motivation.

## System Components

Implementations MUST provide:

### 1. Identity

An identity serves as a unique identifier for users.

### 2. Group

> A group is a collection of identities represented in a structured format.

Author: In the implementation section, the structured format of Groups in Semaphore v4 is explained. 

Is it not clear what a structured format could be, because I can add here something like:

```md
A group is a collection of identities represented in a structured format (e.g., LeanIMT in Semaphore v4).
```

> A group is a collection of identities represented in a structured format.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand your comment.

I'm saying link to the piece of the spec that shows this format, this is a simple markdown [[]] link.

As for the contents of that format, pseudocode or some brief list is fine, similar to here https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/tree/main/specs/2#private-inputs

> A group is a collection of identities represented in a structured format.

Reviewer 4: @vplasencia 

If semaphore was deleted entirely off of github, the repo, the docs, everything, someone should be able to pretty much recreate it from this spec. It should include a simple and concise explanation of each component (both a written description and a technical description) and how they interact together, and not much more.

Some Examples:
> 1. Identity
> An identity serves as a unique identifier for users. It consists of a 32-byte [EdDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdDSA) private key and a 32-byte public key. 
---
> 4. Nullifier
> A nullifier is a unique identifier generated by hashing the identity's private key and a `scope`(referenced below). It is normally used to prevent a user from doing an action more than once within a given scope, but it is not limited to that use case.
> `hash(privKey,scope)`
> 
> *The recommended hashing function is currently [Poseidon](https://www.poseidon-hash.info/).*

@vplasencia / @oskarth I'm sure this could be better but I hope this helps :)

### 3. Anonymous Proof of Membership

An anonymous proof of membership enables users to prove their inclusion in a group without revealing their identity.

### 4. Nullifier

A value designed to be a unique identifier for the zk proof. It is generated using the identity.

### 5. Anonymous Message

After joining a group and proving that they are part of it, users can also send an anonymous message.

## Interaction of System Components

Semaphore Flow:

1. The user generates an identity.
2. The identity is added to the group.
3. An anonymous membership proof can be generated using the identity and group.
4. A nullifier is generated to uniquely represent the user's zk proof while ensuring anonymity.
5. The user can attach an anonymous message (such as a vote, text message).

<div style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="./images/system-components.svg" alt="Description of SVG" width="500" height="500">
</div>

## Implementation

> The implementation section will refer to [Semaphore v4](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/releases/tag/v4.0.0) implemented by [PSE](https://pse.dev/).

Author: The idea of the current spec is to explain Semaphore as a zk protocol, no matter the implementation. This will help devs understand the idea of Semaphore no matter the implementation. Then it should be easier to understand when a protocol is an implementation of Semaphore, no matter if they use something different to represent identities (e.g., hashes instead of eddsa) or groups (e.g., different tree or data structure), etc.

The implementation explained as a reference is Semaphore v4 but it could be any other because all of them follow the same general Semaphore concept/protocol. Does it make sense? 

Semaphore v3 would also be compatible with the general explanation of Semaphore in the spec and it's other way to implement Semaphore.

> The implementation section will refer to [Semaphore v4](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/releases/tag/v4.0.0) implemented by [PSE](https://pse.dev/).

Author: Yes, that implementation is also compatible with the spec. It's not compatible with the implementation in the spec but with the general explanation of Semaphore in the spec. 

I see the Implementation section as a reference for devs, if they want to implement Semaphore. 

Agree, it would be great to have a list of other implementations.

> The implementation section will refer to [Semaphore v4](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/releases/tag/v4.0.0) implemented by [PSE](https://pse.dev/).

Author: There will be a Semaphore Rust implementation soon, this Spec will be used to create it. This new implementation can be added to that list.

> The implementation section will refer to [Semaphore v4](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/releases/tag/v4.0.0) implemented by [PSE](https://pse.dev/).

Reviewer 3: So what's the difference between Semaphore v4 and v3? I find it hard to believe there wouldn't be any protocol differences. If you use different data structures that's a protocol difference, albeit a minor/modular one.

> no matter if they use something different to represent identities (e.g., hashes instead of eddsa) or groups (e.g., different tree or data structure), etc.

So this should be specified in the spec. E.g. with v4 we RECOMMEND using this... Previous versions used X but this is less space efficient. OR whatever.

The protocol should allow someone, without having to consult any other person or piece of code, to implement Semaphore.

> Does it make sense?

As a reader of this spec without any additional out of band context about Semaphore, no it currently is not clear from the spec :D

> Semaphore is implemented using [Circom](https://github.com/iden3/circom) + [Snarkjs](https://github.com/iden3/snarkjs) + [Groth16](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf).

Author: I updated that text to better explain that it's related to the zk functionality of Semaphore.

`Semaphore is implemented using` -> `Semaphore's zk functionality is implemented using`

See commit: https://github.com/zkspecs/zkspecs/pull/10/commits/8518b7d0fbc09a2e0b41fc276375555b3978600b

> Semaphore is implemented using [Circom](https://github.com/iden3/circom) + [Snarkjs](https://github.com/iden3/snarkjs) + [Groth16](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf).

Reviewer 3: As a reader of this spec, it isn't clear what we mean by "zk functionality". This is missing some form of system overview: what are the parts involved in Semaphore as a whole, what role does the circuit play etc. None of this is clear right now, and if I come from outside of the Ethereum/ZK space I'd be completely lost reading this spec.

  verificationKey,
  [merkleTreeRoot, nullifier, hash(message), hash(scope)],
  unpackGroth16Proof(points)
)
```

To learn more about the proof verification in TypeScript/JavaScript, see [the proof verification code](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/blob/main/packages/proof/src/verify-proof.ts).

#### On-chain

Snarkjs is used to generate a Solidity verifier per tree depth. Then, all verifiers are merged into a single one. To know more about the verifier see the [Semaphore Verifier](https://github.com/semaphore-protocol/semaphore/blob/main/packages/contracts/contracts/base/SemaphoreVerifier.sol).

```solidity
return
    verifier.verifyProof(
        [proof.points[0], proof.points[1]],
        [[proof.points[2], proof.points[3]], [proof.points[4], proof.points[5]]],
        [proof.points[6], proof.points[7]],
        [proof.merkleTreeRoot, proof.nullifier, _hash(proof.message), _hash(proof.scope)],
        proof.merkleTreeDepth
    );
```

### Implementation Notes

- Identity generation SHOULD be performed off-chain, in the user's device.
- Semaphore proof generation SHOULD be performed off-chain, in the user's device.

### Limitations of the implementation

> - **Scalability**: As the number of members grows, generating a client-side Merkle proof is no longer feasible. It’s necessary to have a server to do it. This not only is time and data consuming, but could also allow the server to deanonymize the proofs.

Reviewer 3: Is this the only way to do it? E.g. more efficient MT could help maybe. Also some rough data on when this becomes a problem would be useful

> - **On-chain costs**: As the tree grows on-chain, the gas cost of insertions also increases.

Reviewer 3: Any data or analysis on this? Same re "couple of megabytes"

Ideally these are numeric, even if limited (eg assuming 1 million members tree size is this which means N perf)

- **zk-artifacts**: People need to download [zk-artifacts](#zk-artifacts) to generate the zk proof and these have a couple of megabytes which can be an issue with very slow internet connection.

#### Benchmarks

Benchmarks for the LeanIMT can be found in the [LeanIMT paper](https://github.com/privacy-scaling-explorations/zk-kit/tree/main/papers/leanimt).

Benchmarks for Semaphore are available in the [Semaphore documentation](https://docs.semaphore.pse.dev/benchmarks).

## Privacy Guarantees

The protocol MUST guarantee:

> - Private Identity values remain private and controlled by their owners.

Reviewer 3: How does this work with server generated proof?
